AP Government


Unit 2 Reading Guide - Part 2




5.2 The Constitution and the American Presidency (pages 155-165)


1- Selection, Qualifications for Office, and Length of Terms:


Why was working out the details surrounding the Constitution’s creation of a single president so contentious?






Why do you believe the Framers of the Constitution may have decided to not add term limits to the presidency?






2-Explain the 22nd Amendment (1951):








3- Summarize the main arguments Hamilton made in Federalist #70.






4- Presidential Powers and Roles:




Formal (enumerated) powers:








Informal powers: 










5- 5 Key Roles of the President:


A. Chief Executive: (Summarize and Include President’s 15 Executive Branch Departments) 




  









B. Chief Diplomat: (Summarize)






Treaty:






C. Chief Legislator: (Summarize)










State of the Union Address:






Veto:






Pocket Veto:






Executive Privilege:






Executive Agreement:






Signing Statement:






Executive Orders:




What conclusions can be drawn from this graph. Why have the use of executive orders increased since the start of the 20th century?


  



D. Commander in Chief: (Summarize)












Presidential Pardons:






Reprieves:








E. Party Leader: This role is not mentioned in the Constitution as the Framers worried about the dangers of factions which included political parties, however, today they serve as unofficial leaders of their political parties.








5.3 Limits on Presidential Power (pages 165-167)


  



1-How the powers described in the table be both beneficial and detrimental to the US political system?












2-Is the executive branch the most powerful branch of government today?








The War Powers Resolution (1973): 
What is it?




Under terms, a president may only introduce armed forces into conflict if one of the three conditions is present:
1.


2.


3.






Impeachment: (Explain)








Court Decisions: 


U.S. v Nixon:






Obama:




Trump:








5.4 The Modern Presidency in Context (pages 168-176)


1- The Vice Presidency:(Summarize)










2-The First Spouse: (Summarize)






What are some of First Lady Melania Trump’s policy interests?






3-The Executive Office of the President (EOP): (Summarize)












4 main features of the modern president:


1.


2.


3.


4.




How was the creation of the Executive Office of the President a reaction to the increasing demands on the presidency?










4-The President and a Partisan Congress:












Bargaining and persuasion:


5- The President and Public Opinion:










Bully pulpit:








Going public:








6- American’s Evaluations of Presidential Performance:








How can presidents use their “honeymoon period” to support policy agenda?
















  



Thoughts?








7- The President and Public Policy: The Dream Act: (Summarize)




























5.5 The War on Terror and Presidential Power (pages 176-178)


1-The Supreme Court Restricts Presidential Power: 
Explain Hamdi v Rumsfeld (2002) & the Holding






2-Summarize the Paradox of Power












5.5 Section Review










Name: _______________________________________


Unit 2: Interactions Among Branches of Government
Chapter 6: Notes/The Federal Judiciary
	

Federal Judiciary:






Supreme Court:










6.1 Judicial Independence from Money and Politics (pages 186-190)


Federalist # 78: 








1-All Federal Judges are appointed by the president and with consent/approval of the Senate. What about state judges?
Why is this a problem?










2-Why does the appointment of federal judges remain political? Use Sonia Sotomayor as an example.






















6.2 The Constitution and the Federal Judiciary (pages 190-194)


1- What coverage of the Federal Judiciary is listed under Article III in the Consitution?
















Original jurisdiction:








Appellate jurisdiction:














2-What were the Anti Federalists’ concerns with the federal judiciary?










What arguments did Alexander Hamilton make in Federalist #78 to counter these concerns?










3-Explain the purpose of the Judiciary Act of 1789:








4. Most district court nominees are approved, while the confirmation of appellate and Supreme Court justices have become more contentious and affected by partisan political battles over the years. 
Why are district court nominees unaffected?






5. What does it mean that when nominating federal judges, Presidents have to consider both legal and political considerations?
















What do you think is the most important factor to consider when nominating a Supreme Court Justice?












6.3 John Marshall and the Power of the Supreme Court (pages 195-198)


1- Summarize the election of 1800:














2-Summarize the Judiciary Act of 1801 and its complications:








3-What political implications of the Marbury v Madison case did Chief Justice Marshall have to consider?








4-How did Marbury v Madison establish judicial review?






5. What were the implications of this decision?














6.4 Organization of the Federal Judiciary (pages 199-204)


1- Both state and federal courts have jurisdiction over 2 categories of law: criminal and civil cases


A. Explain Criminal:










B. Explain Civil:












2-State Courts:
















  



3-Federal District Courts:














4-Federal Appellate Courts:








5- The Supreme Court:










6-Summarize the process taken when the Supreme Court decides to hear a case. (They receive thousands of petitions a year and only hear 70-80 cases.)


















Writ of cert (certiorari):








Rule of Four:






Precedent:






Stare decisis: 






Amicus curiae briefs:








7-What is the process of considering and deciding the case?










Majority opinion:








Concurring opinion:






Dissenting opinion:


















6.5 Judicial Review, Constitutional Interpretation, Judicial Decision Making (pages 206-209)


1-The two main theories on how Justices interpret the Constitution:


A.Judicial restraint:








B. Judicial Activism: 








The constitution does not specify how the Justices are to interpret it. 
There are many approaches to decision making:


A.Originalism Approach: 










* Original Intent: 








* Original Meaning:








B. Flexible or Living Constitution Approach:










2-What are the limitations on the power of the Supreme Court? (Use examples)










3-Take a look! Does this data prove that the Founders’attempt to create an independent judiciary is a failure?


https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2015-pace-of-social-change/




Name: _______________________________________


Unit 2: Interactions Among Branches of Government
Chapter 7 Notes/The Federal Bureaucracy
	

Federal Bureaucracy:




Americans often have contradictory views of bureaucracy. WHY?












7.1 How the Bureaucracy is Organized (pages 218-222)


Bureaucrat:






1-What are some of the items that you have used or interacted with today that are affected by the federal bureaucracy?
What role does the federal bureaucracy play in your life? 


2-Why has the federal bureaucracy over time experienced periods of little growth and also periods of intense expansion?














3-The Consitution: Early Republic:     What is the Constitutional basis for the federal bureaucracy?
















 Background: When the executive branch of the national government was established in 1789, the federal bureaucracy consisted of just three Cabinet departments and the Office of the Attorney General, later to become the Justice Department. 


In 1789 the State Department had 9 employees, the War Department had 2, and the Treasury Department had 39. Today, the State Department employs about 28,000 civilians, the Defense Department about 670,000, and the Treasury Department about 163,000. 


The federal bureaucracy today boasts 15 Cabinet departments and dozens of agencies, regulatory commissions, and government corporations, with a civilian workforce of more than 2.8 million. The bureaucratic behemoth exercises power and influence over virtually every facet of the nation’s social and economic life. 


4- The first cabinet departments: George Washinton’s cabinet departments?












  

5- Do you believe all 15 departments are necessary still today? Why?














6-What does it mean that Andrew Jackson filled positions in the bureaucracy using political patronage?
(patronage system/AKA spoils system) : "To the victor go the spoils!" Andrew Jackson stocks his government completely with allies in 1829. 










And why do supporters believe he laid the foundation for modern bureaucracy?








7. Explain the Pendleton Act of 1883:








Federal civil service:




Merit system:












7.2 The Structure of the Modern Federal Bureaucracy (pages 223-229)
1- What is the president’s role in the modern federal bureaucracy?2-What role does Congress play in the federal bureaucracy?












  



3-What inferences can be made to the relationship between full-time employees in the cabinet and the ratio of expenditures to the number of employees?




4- Federal Bureaucrats:    Label/describe the three-level organization of the federal bureaucracy.


  
5- Iron Trianglesand Issue Networks:      EXPLAIN! (They are an important part of the policymaking process!!)
Iron Triangles Explained Video


  







7.3 The Bureaucracy and Policymaking (pages 230-234)
1- Explain the difficulty in:
First-defining a problem




Second-getting Congress to Act (getting on the policy agenda)








2-Congress must provide funds for an agency to carry out a policy. Although a federal agency has the authority to act on a policy, Congress controls the financial means to implement the policy. 


If a federal bureaucracy’s main goal is to implement policy, why is it sometimes complex?












Implementation








Bureaucratic discretion








Regulations






**These adopted rules (regulations) must be made public and published in the Federal Register. They carry out the same weight as Congressional law, presidential executive orders and judicial decisions. 




Independent Regulatory Commissions (or the alphabet soup of American government):
*Created as a result of an act of Congress. Example: Environmental Protection Agency was created by Congress to enforce the Clean Air Act.








3-At times the bureaucracy must act somewhat like a court. Explain bureaucratic adjudication.








4-Street level bureaucrats:






5. Hatch Act:








6-Who can evaluate and terminate policy? How?








7.4 Checks on the Bureaucracy (pages 234-239)
1- Control, Oversight, and Reform:














2-Why is the system of separation of powers designed by the framers a challenge to controlling the bureaucracy?
(Consider Madison’s Federalist #51)










3-Role of the President in Bureaucracy:








4-Role of Congress in Bureaucracy:










5- Impact of the Judiciary and the Media:










6-Reliance on Private Organizations: 
7- Should government corporations such as Amtrak and the Post Office be privatized and no longer supplemented by the federal government?